A signal detection theory approach to quantify contextual effects on perceived signal

Authors: Heshu Yin, Kanghee Kim, Joseph Busch, Vijay Singh
Affiliation: Department of Physics and Astronomy, Haverford College, Haverford, PA, USA
Correspondence: vsingh1@haverford.edu

Updated May 29, 2025 by Vijay Singh
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This folder contains the python scripts to analyze the data. It also contains 
the software to run the experiment.

Functions to analyze individual subject data. 

Dependencies:
- Python 3.x
- Required packages: numpy, pandas, matplotlib, psignifit

Run these functions in the terminal from the folder where the data is stored or
change the paths accordingly.

Base folder example: /Users/vsingh1/Documents/GitHub/SimultaneousContrastPaper/

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scripts to analyze individual subject data

1.	save_psychometric_data_for_subject.py

This script analyzes subject data and saves the necessary data for further 
analysis in a file in the Analysis folder. It takes the subject_name as the input 
and produces a file with the comparison chosen data.

Command: python3 Utilities/save_psychometric_data_for_subject.py
Provide subject_name when prompted.

Output: Saves the data with the prefix “raw_data” in the Analysis folder using the same structure as the Data folder: 

raw_data_{subject_name}_condition_{#}_Repetition_{#}.txt


2.	analyze_data_for_subject_luminance.py

Summary: Takes as input the subject_name and generates psychometric functions 
using psignifit, plots the psychometric functions, and saves the figure and threshold information.

Command: python3 Utilities/analyze_data_for_subject_luminance.py  
Provide subject_name when prompted.

Output: Saves the plots and threshold data to the folder “Analysis” using the 
same structure as the data is saved in the folder “Data”.



3.	plot_summary_threshold_for_subject_luminance.py

Summary: Generates the plot of threshold v/s standard lightness for different 
backgrounds and saves the regression parameters.

Command: python3 Utilities/plot_summary_threshold_for_subject_luminance.py 
Provide subject_name when prompted.

Output: Saves the plots to “Analysis” folder under the subject_name folder


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scripts to analyze aggregate subject data


Functions to aggregate data over multiple subjects:

4.	aggregate_multiple_subject_data_average.py

Aggregates the data for multiple subject and saves the aggregated data is a folder. 
When prompted provide the names of the subject to be aggregated and the name of the output folder.

Command: python3 Utilities/aggregate_multiple_subject_data_average.py 
Output: Saves the plots to “Analysis” folder under the output_folder folder

Usage: Asks for subject names to be aggregated and the output_folder name

For the six subject used in the paper, when prompted enter:
subject_apple, subject_cherry, subject_grape, subject_orange, subject_peach, subject_pineapple

output_folder: mean_observer


5.	analyze_aggregated_data_luminance.py
This is similar to analyze_data_for_subject_luminance.py, but is uses the files 
generated by aggregate_multiple_subject_data_average.py to make the 
psychometric function with error bars.

Usage: python3 Utilities/analyze_aggregated_data_luminance.py
Please enter the group name: main_subjects_mean2


6.	aggregate_threshold_over_subjects.py
This uses the thresholds data saved by plot_summary_threshold_for_subject_luminance 
for all subjects to combine the thresholds of all subjects and produce a 
figure with error bars for the threshold data. The thresholds are then plotted 
for each background difference and a straight line is fit to all the data. 
The slope etc. are saved in the folder too.

Usage: python3 Utilities/group_threshold_over_subjects.py

Will ask for subject_names comma separated
For the six subject used in the paper, when prompted enter:
subject_apple, subject_cherry, subject_grape, subject_orange, subject_peach, subject_pineapple

Enter a name for this group (e.g., 'experimental_group'): mean_threshold


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scripts to run the experiment.

The experiment is run through an app built and exported through Unity on an iMac
computer. These might or might not run on other computers dues to compatibility 
of the app on other computers. The entire Unity project is too large to store on
Github. Please contact the authors for the project.

Gaming app: Experiment1


Function 1:
generate_conditions_for_subject.py
Generates the trial structure text files for all conditions for a subject. 

Usage:  python3 Utilities/generate_conditions_for_subject.py
Provide subject_name when prompted.

*******************************************************************************
*******************************************************************************
WARNING: This function uses the calibration file exponent_lastest.txt
stored in the folder SimultaneousContrastPaper/calibration_latest/. This files 
contains the gamma exponents for the RGB channel of the experimental monitor. 
This file should be updated for the monitor you are using.
*******************************************************************************
*******************************************************************************


Function 2:
RunExperiment.py
This function starts the Unity application to run the experiment, collect, and 
store data. 

Command: python3 Unities/RunExperiment.py subject_name

subject_name should be replaced by the name of the subject.



